---
layout: main
title: Scroobius Pip and the Defeat of Death
short-title: Scroobius Pip

amazon: http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B005CWPO84/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&tag=theothevawil-21&linkCode=as2&camp=1634&creative=19450&creativeASIN=B005CWPO84

name: Distraction Pieces

quote: The last thing on my list of things to do is try dying If you wanna live forever then you will die trying  Inevitable like the weather, there's no use in lying Death makes life worth living, so stop crying


---
Scroob is possibly the best spoken-word poet on the British scene. I saw him along with [Alex Gwyther](http://www.myspace.com/thebestofthebiro), Ed Sheeran, and [Polar Bear](http://www.myspace.com/polarbearspoken) a couple of years ago in Birmingham, and he utterly blew me away. There's few that match his sense of rhythm and rhyme, but lest the usual (and regretfully oft-true) criticism of spoken word - that the attention is all on the way things are said while the content is left to rot - be levelled against him the lyrics are where the brilliance lies.

So when he came to Reading late last year I booked up all the tickets I could and brought along everyone I could persuade to join me. Unfortunately, this showing left me wanting. There were some mitigating factors that I shan't go in to, and the warm up act appeared to have the opposite of all the qualities that I enjoyed in Mr. Pip's works, but my main issue was the style he chose to deliver in. While Distraction Pieces bears a greater musical resemblance to most of what I listen to, I felt his work with Dan Le Sac was a more suitable media for the discussions he raises with his work. Mainly because it doesn't feel like a discussion at all when you're having his points and ideas thrust upon you from literally blown speakers and it fails to give you anything of a chance to respond or even understand them.

It is, however one of the pieces from his latest album that I would like to discuss today. It's track 4 from the album, "Try Dying". I found a [spoken-word rendition of it on youtube](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GLGq5szKzbU) which is useful as it should give you a chance to actually listen to what he's saying before I launch in to my piece on it.

<iframe width="630" height="355" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/GLGq5szKzbU?feature=player_embedded" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="true"> </iframe>

In this work he's proclaiming quite the opposite philosophy to that of the [Coen Brother's nihilism]({% post_url 2012-03-27-O Brother, where art thou and the value of choice %}) we discussed last week. Rather, it is one the late Steve Jobs so aptly characterised: That life is given meaning only by it's termination. That eternal life is not only impossible, but undesirable. To quote Mr. Jobs

>"No one wants to die. Even people who want to go to heaven don't want to die to get there. And yet death is the destination we all share. No one has ever escaped it. And that is as it should be, because death is very likely the single best invention of life. It's life's change agent; it clears out the old to make way for the new. Right now, the new is you. But someday, not too long from now, you will gradually become the old and be cleared away. Sorry to be so dramatic, but it's quite true."

Or as Scroob put it

>"Death makes life worth living, so stop crying"

The idea that death adds, rather than robs life of meaning is one I have little sympathy for, it just seems so fundamentally counter-intuitive. Death is so clearly bad. To proclaim that actually death is the only reason anyone achieves anything is to tell a mourner that their plight is not only unjustified, but selfish: after all if they never died they'd never have achieved they until recently possessed that makes you want to mourn them. To want them to still be here is to want them to have never been. To mourn is to wish upon someone an eternity of mediocrity.

I can just about see the derivation if we equate it to a deadline: little work is often done on a project until one approaches it's conclusion. This is due to a combination of motivation and necessary time management against other tasks, however this only works because the deadline is set and known. If instead of clearly laying out which piece of work was due in at what point of the term the lecturers instead informed us that we would be randomly jumped at different times and they would demand whatever we had so far it simply would not work. That changes the priority of the time-management from solving the nearest problem to solving the easiest one, thereby reducing the sum total of human achievement; and lessens or even removes the motivation one, after all you could spend 300 hours on a piece, and have it collected before you can perform the final 50 which provide any meaningful output. Then all you've done is wasted time.

It is also incorrect to suggest that a deadline is required as the only valid motivation for completing a thing. There is much done without that external requirement, it is superfluous when the love of doing something is reason enough to have it done. There is nobody demanding I finish a book, there is no timeline for me to have read chapter fifteen by (and when there is, such as in book clubs I often find myself shirking them), I finish the book because I want to continue reading it, because the joy inherent in that is enough. The same goes for creative works, much of Van Gough's work was uncommissioned, as is almost all of Banksy's; but they still create for the joy of creation itself.

As you should be able to tell, I find such thinking downright offensive. And Pip recognises that, he's not hiding from the fact.

>"Are you listening?
>
>Are your ears open for christening?
>
>'Cause I'm pissing in the very same well you've been wishing in
>
>'Til it's glistening,
>
>Ain't a nice image but it's a clear one
>
>Listen hear son,
>
>This ain't dismissive, this is fearsome"

He feels the need to offend, because he feels the need to proselytise, because this philosophy is necessary to him, because of what it does to death. Where the nihilist recognises death's power, Pip robs it of its sting. In redefining death as something ultimately good then what is there to fear? After all it is the reason he has achieved all that he has in life. How much would over people's lives be improved if they too stopped wasting their limited time futilely trying to escape death when really it's what they need to succeed?

Unfortunately for those that cling tight to these ideals it is merely sticking your head in the sand. You can shout as loud as you like from the rooftops that death is a great thing, but [it won't stop people mourning you when you go](http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/newsdesk/2011/10/mourning-steve-jobs-the-purpose-of-public-grief.html). And I think Scroob must either recognise this, have changed his mind in recent years, or simply have an inconsistent world view as much of his other work speaks of the pain of death. To name a few [Magician's Assistant](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RqRKoq-dW8c) speaks of those left behind after a suicide, while [Tommy C](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r8zi7vcnjVc) says that the death of the eponymous magician was beautiful because in spite of the obvious tragedy his death still bought joy to those unaware of what they saw.

Death may not be a skeleton, but it still hurts, and it's still real. And we can't get away from it with clever word games. Calling it something else doesn't help, saying it actually makes things better [doesn't help](http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=steve+jobs+%7C+date+of+death). What we need is a real solution. And that is offered in Jesus.

>Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; nor does corruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I tell you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality. So when this corruptible has put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written: Death is swallowed up in victory. O Death, where is your sting? O Hades, where is your victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

[1 Corinthians 15:50-58](http://www.youversion.com/bible/1cor.15.50-58nkjv)

In choosing to lay down His life to a death that could not hold Him, He freed us too from its grip. Death has been truly defeated without being trivialised. He knows the pain of it because He suffered it too, but it can no longer hold us. It is no longer our end. We shall rise again with Him in His glory.
