---
layout: main
title: Ink and the search for redemption
short-title: Ink
image: ink.jpg

amazon: http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B004M169BC/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&camp=1634&creative=19450&creativeASIN=B004M169BC&linkCode=as2&tag=theothevawil-21

name: Ink

quote: A man has a weakness, he's flawed. That flaw leads him to guilt. The guilt leads him to shame. The shame he compensates with pride and vanity. And when pride fails, despair takes over and they all lead to his destruction. It will become his fate... Something's gotta stop the flow.
---
Ink depicts a secret war between "Story tellers", who bring good dreams to those who seep; "Incubus", who bring nightmares; and Ink, one of our protagonists, stuck in between. Ink is determined to join the Incubus, and to prove himself needs to kidnap a young girl from her dreams and bring her to them for sacrifice. We see the Story Tellers trying to stop this in two ways: some of them try to reunite the now-comatose girl to her estranged father in the real world, while one works in the dream world to persuade Ink to change.

It's one of the finest examples of world-building I've seen in a while: it's clearly only one story of many that have happened in this world, and the film manages to get this across without introducing thousands of nouns. The art direction and sound design also build a strong dream-like aesthetic that draws you in to the world.

Ink is ultimately a film about redemption. Interestingly, though, it is not man's search for redemption, but redemption's search for the man. Both of our protagonists are portrayed as being both unable and unwilling to save themselves.

John, the girl's estranged father, is a successful businessman. He makes a series of good sales that quickly push him through the ranks, but as he climbs the corporate ladder he spends more time at work or celebrations and drifts away from his wife and daughter. Eventually, his wife dies and a judge declares him unfit as a father, taking the girl away. This is clearly a painful moment for him, though as much as a hit on his pride and status as anything: shortly after his daughter enters a coma he is asked to go visit her, at which point he simply gets angry at the other character for taking her away in the first place and carries on with the deal he's working on.

Ink, meanwhile, entered the dream world after he committed suicide in reality. This has left him ugly and scarred in the dream world, so when the Incubus offer him beauty in exchange for sacrifice and his eternal fate he leaps at it. Early on he captures the Story Teller who tries to save the girl from him, and while she tries to persuade him away from this course he'll have none of it: this is what he wants.

The film makes it clear that as well as the unwillingness on the part of the protagonists, there is an inevitability to it, that these are the only things that can happen without the intervention of the story tellers.

<iframe width="630" height="355" src="//www.youtube.com/embed/HRq4pqtXTbE" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen="true"> </iframe>

The bible tells a similar story, Romans 5:6-11 says

>For while we were still weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly. For one will scarcely die for a righteous person - though perhaps for a good person one would dare even to die - but God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us. Since, therefore, we have now been justified by his blood, much more shall we be saved by him from the wrath of God. **For if while we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son**, much more, now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. More than that, we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received reconciliation.
When Jesus came to save us we were still enemies of God. We had not expressed any interest in coming back to Him, it's not like we'd sat down with God and come to terms that were satisfactory for both of us. God initiated everything, while we longed for the dark and evil things of this world and wanted nothing to do with Him, He sent His Son to die for us do we could be brought back.

It's a pattern we see played out through the entire bible. Back in Genesis 3, almost as soon as Adam has sinned he hides from God, who then seeks him out saying "Where are you?". It has been said that the story of the bible is not man's search for God, but God's search for man.

This is true both in the grand scale of history and in our own lives and our own salvation. Not only did Jesus die for humanity at a time when we as a people wanted nothing to do with Him, but those of you who are Christians were only able to accept His offer of life because His Holy Spirit had already changed you and fixed you enough to see your need for salvation, so rejoice in Him who took every part in saving you.

For those of you who aren't yet Christians, if you're feeling the emptiness of the promises you're chasing, if you're feeling your need for redemption, then rejoice because God is working in you to show you your need for what He's already provided. So don't throw this opportunity away, grab hold of His redemption with both hands, it's all you need to do.
