---
published: true
layout: main
title: I want to be the very best
---

>I wanna be the very best  
>Like no one ever was  
>To catch them is my real test  
>To train them is my cause

<iframe width="630" height="355" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/NcfdoSuC6MI" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

On [this week's episode](http://coolghosts.net/cool-stuff/2016/7/18/daft-souls-86) of [Daft Souls](http://coolghosts.net/daft-souls/), during an interesting discussion about Pokémon Go, Quinns raised a great point about the grim reality of Pokémon, and the quest to become the Pokémon master. If you want to listen below, the wider Pokémon Go discussion opens the podcast, with the relevant section starting at about 23:30. If not, I've transcribed it as well.

<iframe width="100%" height="166" scrolling="no" frameborder="no" src="https://w.soundcloud.com/player/?url=https%3A//api.soundcloud.com/tracks/274189901&amp;color=ff5500&amp;auto_play=false&amp;hide_related=false&amp;show_comments=true&amp;show_user=true&amp;show_reposts=false"></iframe>

>**Quinns:** There is something I find kind of floofy about the Pokémon fiction that this is making clear. I've always wondered, in the world of Pokémon ... if you want to be the best, the reality of Pokémon would be so grim. Because you have tens of thousands of kids all trying to be the best, and none of them can be the best Pokémon Go tells you that in real life, Pokémon would be a horrible grind where everyone is racing to get ahead.
>
>**Matt:** I can't do anything in it, every time I go to a Gym I always have a look at the level of the things in it, and I'm like "yeah, I can't do that". It's kind of weird actually, *it's antithetical to what Pokémon is about*
>
>**Kezia:** That's the fantasy, they play into the fantasy, the classic childhood empowerment fantasy.
>
>**Quinns:** I think it's interesting to have the classic empowerment fantasy, and now have an AR game that has that and shows that *it's incompatible with real life*.

Here Quinns makes a very astute point: Pokémon is, and always has been about being the best. The games end once you have bested every other trainer in the country, and performed the never-before feat of capturing every single Pokémon in the land, including several one-of-a-kind creatures of legend. And in the games, this works, because you are the only player. You are the hero, the entire world revolves around you.

But introduce other players in to the mix, and it suddenly gets a whole lot trickier. There may not be an Elite Four to best, no world ranking; but there are gyms to control, and as a team instinct player, I know it's never us in control of the gym. The game has been out less than a week, and I already feel like I'm irrecoverably far behind. I will never be the Pokémon master. The fantasy that Pokémon Go sold itself on is a fantasy it is only able to destroy, because it is incompatible with real life.

Instead, what life presents us in Pokémon Go is exactly what it presents us with in every other area of life. If you want to be the best, then the only way to get there is by tearing everyone else down, and climbing on their backs. There is only one number one spot, and if you want it you need to best the person in it.

Pokémon Go makes it particularly evident because either you have your name at the top of a gym, or someone else does. And if you want a gym somebody else owns, then you must fight them for it. But it's equally true elsewhere: I accidentally ended up in Next on sale day last weekend, and the ferality of the shoppers as they tore through the store was unbelievable, all because the sale was a zero-sum game - if someone else got the cheap clothes, then they couldn't. The same goes if you want a promotion, or a table at a trendy restaurant.

We are told that life is a race to the top, and the only way up is to tear everyone else down. As Quinns points out, this is an awful way to live. Everyone above you is standing in your way, and everyone below you wants to take you down. If this is life, then it is a life I want no part of.

Fortunately, Jesus shows us a better and a truer way.

>And Jesus called them to him and said to them, “You know that those who are considered rulers of the Gentiles lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them. **But it shall not be so among you. But whoever would be great among you must be your servant, and whoever would be first among you must be slave of all**.

[Mark 10:42-44 (ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Mark 10:42-44/)

Life in Jesus says that life is not a race to the top where you tear everyone else down, but a race to the bottom where you lift everyone else up. Our aim in life is not to scoop up as much power as possible, and wield it over people; but make ourselves slaves, and give everything we have for others. That is what greatness looks like in Jesus' kingdom, that is what it means to be the best.

Isn't this a much better way of living? Isn't this a world you'd much rather live in? No longer do we need tear each other apart, no more do we need to hate those above us, or fear those below. And it gets even better - Jesus carries on.

> Even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.

[Mark 10:45 (ESV)](http://www.esvbible.org/Mark 10:45/)

Because in Jesus' new kingdom, not only do we live by this better way of life, but so does our king. In fact, he is the king because of this new system. Jesus does not just tell us to make ourselves slaves, but he gives up his heavenly throne to make himself a slave. He does not merely tell us to lower ourselves, but he lowers himself, first to earth as a man, then to death.

So I'm going to keep playing Pokémon Go, I'm going to keep enjoying it, and I'm going to keep failing at it. I'm going to continue enjoy seeing the internet full of inspiring stories about the game. But I'm not going to buy into its lie. I don't want to be the very best, like no one ever was. Becuase I know that Jesus has gone lower than anyone else, he has served more than anyone else, and so he is lifted higher than anyone else. The number one spot belongs to Jesus, and Jesus alone, and so he is lifting all of us up.
